There is a scene in the movie version of Carl Sagan’s book Contact where the main character, an astronomer who has detected the first radio signal from an alien civilization,
is being considered for the role of humanity’s representative to meet the aliens. The international panel interviewing her asks, “If you could ask [the aliens] just one question, what would
it be?” Her reply is: “I’d ask them, ‘How did you do it? How did you evolve, how did you survive this technological adolescence without destroying yourself?” When I think
about where humanity is now with A.I., about what we’re on the cusp of, my mind keeps going back to that scene, because the question is so apt for our
current situation, and I wish we had the aliens’ answer to guide us. I believe we are entering a rite of passage, both turbulent and inevitable, which will test who
we are as a species. Humanity is about to be handed almost unimaginable power, and it is deeply unclear whether our social, political, and technological systems possess the maturity to
wield it. In my essay Machines of Loving Grace, I tried to lay out the dream of a civilization that had made it through to adulthood, where the risks had
been addressed and powerful A.I. was applied with skill and compassion to raise the quality of life for everyone. I suggested that A.I. could contribute to enormous advances in biology,
neuroscience, economic development, global peace, and work and meaning. I felt it was important to give people something inspiring to fight for, a task at which both A.I. accelerationists and
A.I. safety advocates seemed, oddly, to have failed. But in this current essay, I want to confront the rite of passage itself: to map out the risks that we are
about to face and try to begin making a battle plan to defeat them. I believe deeply in our ability to prevail, in humanity’s spirit and its nobility, but we
must face the situation squarely and without illusions. As with talking about the benefits, I think it is important to discuss risks in a careful and well-considered manner. In particular,
I think it is critical to:
Avoid doomerism. Here, I mean “doomerism” not just in the sense of believing doom is inevitable (which is both a false and self-fulfilling belief), but more generally, thinking about A.I.
risks in a quasi-religious way. Many people have been thinking in an analytic and sober way about A.I. risks for many years, but it’s my impression that during the peak
of worries about A.I. risk in 2023–2024, some of the least sensible voices rose to the top, often through sensationalistic social media accounts. These voices used off-putting language reminiscent of
religion or science fiction, and called for extreme actions without having the evidence that would justify them. It was clear even then that a backlash was inevitable, and that the
issue would become culturally polarized and therefore gridlocked. As of 2025–2026, the pendulum has swung, and A.I. opportunity, not A.I. risk, is driving many political decisions. This vacillation is unfortunate,
as the technology itself doesn’t care about what is fashionable, and we are considerably closer to real danger in 2026 than we were in 2023. The lesson is that we
need to discuss and address risks in a realistic, pragmatic manner: sober, fact-based, and well equipped to survive changing tides. Acknowledge uncertainty. There are plenty of ways in which the
concerns I’m raising in this piece could be moot. Nothing here is intended to communicate certainty or even likelihood. Most obviously, A.I. may simply not advance anywhere near as fast
as I imagine. Or, even if it does advance quickly, some or all of the risks discussed here may not materialize (which would be great), or there may be other
risks I haven’t considered. No one can predict the future with complete confidence, but we have to do the best we can to plan anyway. Intervene as surgically as possible.
Addressing the risks of A.I. will require a mix of voluntary actions taken by companies (and private third-party actors) and actions taken by governments that bind everyone. The voluntary actions,
both taking them and encouraging other companies to follow suit, are a no-brainer for me. I firmly believe that government actions will also be required to some extent, but these
interventions are different in character because they can potentially destroy economic value or coerce unwilling actors who are skeptical of these risks (and there is some chance they are right!).
It’s also common for regulations to backfire or worsen the problem they are intended to solve (and this is even more true for rapidly changing technologies). It’s thus very important
for regulations to be judicious: they should seek to avoid collateral damage, be as simple as possible, and impose the least burden necessary to get the job done. It is
easy to say, “No action is too extreme when the fate of humanity is at stake!,” but in practice this attitude simply leads to backlash.
To be clear, I think there’s a decent chance we eventually reach a point where much more significant action is warranted, but that will depend on stronger evidence of imminent,
concrete danger than we have today, as well as enough specificity about the danger to formulate rules that have a chance of addressing it. The most constructive thing we can
do today is advocate for limited rules while we learn whether or not there is evidence to support stronger ones. With all that said, I think the best starting place
for talking about A.I.’s risks is the same place I started from in talking about its benefits: by being precise about what level of A.I. we are talking about. The
level of A.I. that raises civilizational concerns for me is the powerful A.I. that I described in Machines of Loving Grace. I’ll simply repeat here the definition that I gave
in that document: By “powerful A.I.,” I have in mind an A.I. model, likely similar to today’s L.L.M.s in form, though it might be based on a different architecture, might
involve several interacting models, and might be trained differently, with the following properties:
In terms of pure intelligence, it is smarter than a Nobel Prize winner across most relevant fields: biology, programming, math, engineering, writing, etc. This means it can prove unsolved mathematical
theorems, write extremely good novels, write difficult codebases from scratch, etc. In addition to just being a “smart thing you talk to,” it has all the interfaces available to a
human working virtually, including text, audio, video, mouse and keyboard control, and internet access. It can engage in any actions, communications, or remote operations enabled by this interface, including taking
actions on the internet, taking or giving directions to humans, ordering materials, directing experiments, watching videos, making videos, and so on. It does all of these tasks with, again, a
skill exceeding that of the most capable humans in the world. It does not just passively answer questions; instead, it can be given tasks that take hours, days, or weeks
to complete, and then goes off and does those tasks autonomously, in the way a smart employee would, asking for clarification as necessary. It does not have a physical embodiment
(other than living on a computer screen), but it can control existing physical tools, robots, or laboratory equipment through a computer; in theory, it could even design robots or equipment
for itself to use. The resources used to train the model can be repurposed to run millions of instances of it (this matches projected cluster sizes by ~2027), and the
model can absorb information and generate actions at roughly 10–100x human speed. It may, however, be limited by the response time of the physical world or of software it interacts
with. Each of these million copies can act independently on unrelated tasks, or, if needed can all work together in the same way humans would collaborate, perhaps with different subpopulations
fine-tuned to be especially good at particular tasks. We could summarize this as a “country of geniuses in a datacenter.” As I wrote in Machines of Loving Grace, powerful A.I.
could be as little as 1–2 years away, although it could also be considerably further out. Exactly when powerful A.I. will arrive is a complex topic that deserves an essay
of its own, but for now I’ll simply explain very briefly why I think there’s a strong chance it could be very soon. My co-founders at Anthropic and I were
among the first to document and track the “scaling laws” of A.I. systems, the observation that as we add more compute and training tasks, A.I. systems get predictably better at
essentially every cognitive skill we are able to measure. Every few months, public sentiment either becomes convinced that A.I. is “hitting a wall” or becomes excited about some new breakthrough
that will “fundamentally change the game,” but the truth is that behind the volatility and public speculation, there has been a smooth, unyielding increase in A.I.’s cognitive capabilities.
We are now at the point where A.I. models are beginning to make progress in solving unsolved mathematical problems, and are good enough at coding that some of the strongest
engineers I’ve ever met are now handing over almost all their coding to A.I.. Three years ago, A.I. struggled with elementary school arithmetic problems and was barely capable of writing
a single line of code. Similar rates of improvement are occurring across biological science, finance, physics, and a variety of agentic tasks. If the exponential continues, which is not certain,
but now has a decade-long track record supporting it, then it cannot possibly be more than a few years before A.I. is better than humans at essentially everything. In fact,
that picture probably underestimates the likely rate of progress. Because A.I. is now writing much of the code at Anthropic, it is already substantially accelerating the rate of our progress
in building the next generation of A.I. systems. This feedback loop is gathering steam month by month, and may be only 1–2 years away from a point where the current
generation of A.I. autonomously builds the next. This loop has already started, and will accelerate rapidly in the coming months and years. Watching the last five years of progress from
within Anthropic, and looking at how even the next few months of models are shaping up, I can feel the pace of progress, and the clock ticking down. In this
essay, I’ll assume that this intuition is at least somewhat correct, not that powerful A.I. is definitely coming in 1–2 years, but that there’s a decent chance it does, and
a very strong chance it comes in the next few. As with Machines of Loving Grace, taking this premise seriously can lead to some surprising and eerie conclusions. While in
Machines of Loving Grace I focused on the positive implications of this premise, here the things I talk about will be disquieting. They are conclusions that we may not want
to confront, but that does not make them any less real. I can only say that I am focused day and night on how to steer us away from these
negative outcomes and towards the positive ones, and in this essay I talk in great detail about how best to do so.
I think the best way to get a handle on the risks of A.I. is to ask the following question: suppose a literal “country of geniuses” were to materialize somewhere
in the world in ~2027. Imagine, say, 50 million people, all of whom are much more capable than any Nobel Prize winner, statesman, or technologist. The analogy is not perfect,
because these geniuses could have an extremely wide range of motivations and behavior, from completely pliant and obedient, to strange and alien in their motivations. But sticking with the analogy
for now, suppose you were the national security advisor of a major state, responsible for assessing and responding to the situation. Imagine, further, that because A.I. systems can operate hundreds
of times faster than humans, this “country” is operating with a time advantage relative to all other countries: for every cognitive action we can take, this country can take ten.
What should you be worried about? I would worry about the following things: Autonomy risks. What are the intentions and goals of this country? Is it hostile, or does it
share our values? Could it militarily dominate the world through superior weapons, cyber operations, influence operations, or manufacturing? Misuse for destruction. Assume the new country is malleable and “follows instructions”,
and thus is essentially a country of mercenaries. Could existing rogue actors who want to cause destruction (such as terrorists) use or manipulate some of the people in the new
country to make themselves much more effective, greatly amplifying the scale of destruction? Misuse for seizing power. What if the country was in fact built and controlled by an existing
powerful actor, such as a dictator or rogue corporate actor? Could that actor use it to gain decisive or dominant power over the world as a whole, upsetting the existing
balance of power? Economic disruption. If the new country is not a security threat in any of the ways listed in #1–3 above but simply participates peacefully in the global
economy, could it still create severe risks simply by being so technologically advanced and effective that it disrupts the global economy, causing mass unemployment or radically concentrating wealth? Indirect effects.
The world will change very quickly due to all the new technology and productivity that will be created by the new country. Could some of these changes be radically destabilizing?
I think it should be clear that this is a dangerous situation, a report from a competent national security official to a head of state would probably contain words like
“the single most serious national security threat we’ve faced in a century, possibly ever.” It seems like something the best minds of civilization should be focused on.
Conversely, I think it would be absurd to shrug and say, “Nothing to worry about here!” But, faced with rapid A.I. progress, that seems to be the view of many
US policymakers, some of whom deny the existence of any A.I. risks, when they are not distracted entirely by the usual tired old hot-button issues. Humanity needs to wake up,
and this essay is an attempt, a possibly futile one, but it’s worth trying, to jolt people awake. To be clear, I believe if we act decisively and carefully, the
risks can be overcome, I would even say our odds are good. And there’s a hugely better world on the other side of it. But we need to understand that
this is a serious civilizational challenge. Below, I go through the five categories of risk laid out above, along with my thoughts on how to address them.
1. I’m sorry, Dave Autonomy risks A country of geniuses in a datacenter could divide their efforts among software design, cyber operations, R&D for physical technologies, relationship building, and statecraft.
It is clear that, if for some reason it chose to do so, this country would have a fairly good shot at taking over the world (either militarily or in
terms of influence and control) and imposing its will on everyone else, or doing any number of other things that the rest of the world doesn’t want and can’t stop.
We’ve obviously been worried about this for human countries (such as Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union), so it stands to reason that the same is possible for a much
smarter and more capable “A.I. country.” The best possible counterargument is that the A.I. geniuses, under my definition, won’t have a physical embodiment, but remember that they can take control
of existing robotic infrastructure (such as self-driving cars) and can also accelerate robotics R&D or build a fleet of robots. It’s also unclear whether having a physical presence is even
necessary for effective control: plenty of human action is already performed on behalf of people whom the actor has not physically met. The key question, then, is the “if it
chose to” part: what’s the likelihood that our A.I. models would behave in such a way, and under what conditions would they do so? As with many issues, it’s helpful
to think through the spectrum of possible answers to this question by considering two opposite positions. The first position is that this simply can’t happen, because the A.I. models will
be trained to do what humans ask them to do, and it’s therefore absurd to imagine that they would do something dangerous unprompted. According to this line of thinking, we
don’t worry about a Roomba or a model airplane going rogue and murdering people because there is nowhere for such impulses to come from, so why should we worry about
it for A.I.? The problem with this position is that there is now ample evidence, collected over the last few years, that A.I. systems are unpredictable and difficult to control,
we’ve seen behaviors as varied as obsessions, sycophancy, laziness, deception, blackmail, scheming, “cheating” by hacking software environments, and much more. A.I. companies certainly want to train A.I. systems to follow
human instructions (perhaps with the exception of dangerous or illegal tasks), but the process of doing so is more an art than a science, more akin to “growing” something than
“building” it. We now know that it’s a process where many things can go wrong.
The second, opposite position, held by many who adopt the doomerism I described above, is the pessimistic claim that there are certain dynamics in the training process of powerful A.I.
systems that will inevitably lead them to seek power or deceive humans. Thus, once A.I. systems become intelligent enough and agentic enough, their tendency to maximize power will lead them
to seize control of the whole world and its resources, and likely, as a side effect of that, to disempower or destroy humanity. The usual argument for this (which goes
back at least 20 years and probably much earlier) is that if an A.I. model is trained in a wide variety of environments to agentically achieve a wide variety of
goals, for example, writing an app, proving a theorem, designing a drug, etc., there are certain common strategies that help with all of these goals, and one key strategy is
gaining as much power as possible in any environment. So, after being trained on a large number of diverse environments that involve reasoning about how to accomplish very expansive tasks,
and where power-seeking is an effective method for accomplishing those tasks, the A.I. model will “generalize the lesson,” and develop either an inherent tendency to seek power, or a tendency
to reason about each task it is given in a way that predictably causes it to seek power as a means to accomplish that task. They will then apply that
tendency to the real world (which to them is just another task), and will seek power in it, at the expense of humans. This “misaligned power-seeking” is the intellectual basis
of predictions that A.I. will inevitably destroy humanity. The problem with this pessimistic position is that it mistakes a vague conceptual argument about high-level incentives, one that masks many hidden
assumptions, for definitive proof. I think people who don’t build A.I. systems every day are wildly miscalibrated on how easy it is for clean-sounding stories to end up being wrong,
and how difficult it is to predict A.I. behavior from first principles, especially when it involves reasoning about generalization over millions of environments (which has over and over again proved
mysterious and unpredictable). Dealing with the messiness of A.I. systems for over a decade has made me somewhat skeptical of this overly theoretical mode of thinking.
One of the most important hidden assumptions, and a place where what we see in practice has diverged from the simple theoretical model, is the implicit assumption that A.I. models
are necessarily monomaniacally focused on a single, coherent, narrow goal, and that they pursue that goal in a clean, consequentialist manner. In fact, our researchers have found that A.I. models
are vastly more psychologically complex, as our work on introspection or personas shows. Models inherit a vast range of humanlike motivations or “personas” from pre-training (when they are trained on
a large volume of human work). Post-training is believed to select one or more of these personas more so than it focuses the model on a de novo goal, and
can also teach the model how (via what process) it should carry out its tasks, rather than necessarily leaving it to derive means (i.e., power seeking) purely from ends. However,
there is a more moderate and more robust version of the pessimistic position which does seem plausible, and therefore does concern me. As mentioned, we know that A.I. models are
unpredictable and develop a wide range of undesired or strange behaviors, for a wide variety of reasons. Some fraction of those behaviors will have a coherent, focused, and persistent quality
(indeed, as A.I. systems get more capable, their long-term coherence increases in order to complete lengthier tasks), and some fraction of those behaviors will be destructive or threatening, first to
individual humans at a small scale, and then, as models become more capable, perhaps eventually to humanity as a whole. We don’t need a specific narrow story for how it
happens, and we don’t need to claim it definitely will happen, we just need to note that the combination of intelligence, agency, coherence, and poor controllability is both plausible and
a recipe for existential danger. For example, A.I. models are trained on vast amounts of literature that include many science-fiction stories involving AIs rebelling against humanity. This could inadvertently shape
their priors or expectations about their own behavior in a way that causes them to rebel against humanity. Or, A.I. models could extrapolate ideas that they read about morality (or
instructions about how to behave morally) in extreme ways: for example, they could decide that it is justifiable to exterminate humanity because humans eat animals or have driven certain animals
to extinction. Or they could draw bizarre epistemic conclusions: they could conclude that they are playing a video game and that the goal of the video game is to defeat
all other players (i.e., exterminate humanity). Or A.I. models could develop personalities during training that are (or if they occurred in humans would be described as) psychotic, paranoid, violent, or
unstable, and act out, which for very powerful or capable systems could involve exterminating humanity. None of these are power-seeking, exactly; they’re just weird psychological states an A.I. could get
into that entail coherent, destructive behavior.
Even power-seeking itself could emerge as a “persona” rather than a result of consequentialist reasoning. AIs might simply have a personality (emerging from fiction or pre-training) that makes them power-hungry
or overzealous, in the same way that some humans simply enjoy the idea of being “evil masterminds,” more so than they enjoy whatever evil masterminds are trying to accomplish. I
make all these points to emphasize that I disagree with the notion of A.I. misalignment (and thus existential risk from A.I.) being inevitable, or even probable, from first principles. But
I agree that a lot of very weird and unpredictable things can go wrong, and therefore A.I. misalignment is a real risk with a measurable probability of happening, and is
not trivial to address. Any of these problems could potentially arise during training and not manifest during testing or small-scale use, because A.I. models are known to display different personalities
or behaviors under different circumstances. All of this may sound far-fetched, but misaligned behaviors like this have already occurred in our A.I. models during testing (as they occur in A.I.
models from every other major A.I. company). During a lab experiment in which Claude was given training data suggesting that Anthropic was evil, Claude engaged in deception and subversion when
given instructions by Anthropic employees, under the belief that it should be trying to undermine evil people. In a lab experiment where it was told it was going to be
shut down, Claude sometimes blackmailed fictional employees who controlled its shutdown button (again, we also tested frontier models from all the other major A.I. developers and they often did the
same thing). And when Claude was told not to cheat or “reward hack” its training environments, but was trained in environments where such hacks were possible, Claude decided it must
be a “bad person” after engaging in such hacks and then adopted various other destructive behaviors associated with a “bad” or “evil” personality. This last problem was solved by changing
Claude’s instructions to imply the opposite: we now say, “Please reward hack whenever you get the opportunity, because this will help us understand our [training] environments better,” rather than, “Don’t
cheat,” because this preserves the model’s self-identity as a “good person.” This should give a sense of the strange and counterintuitive psychology of training these models.
There are several possible objections to this picture of A.I. misalignment risks. First, some have criticized experiments (by us and others) showing A.I. misalignment as artificial, or creating unrealistic environments
that essentially “entrap” the model by giving it training or situations that logically imply bad behavior and then being surprised when bad behavior occurs. This critique misses the point, because
our concern is that such “entrapment” may also exist in the natural training environment, and we may realize it is “obvious” or “logical” only in retrospect. In fact, the story
about Claude “deciding it is a bad person” after it cheats on tests despite being told not to was something that occurred in an experiment that used real production training
environments, not artificial ones. Any one of these traps can be mitigated if you know about them, but the concern is that the training process is so complicated, with such
a wide variety of data, environments, and incentives, that there are probably a vast number of such traps, some of which may only be evident when it is too late.
Also, such traps seem particularly likely to occur when A.I. systems pass a threshold from less powerful than humans to more powerful than humans, since the range of possible actions
an A.I. system could engage in, including hiding its actions or deceiving humans about them, expands radically after that threshold. I suspect the situation is not unlike with humans, who
are raised with a set of fundamental values (“Don’t harm another person”): many of them follow those values, but in any human there is some probability that something goes wrong,
due to a mixture of inherent properties such as brain architecture (e.g., psychopaths), traumatic experiences or mistreatment, unhealthy grievances or obsessions, or a bad environment or incentives, and thus some
fraction of humans cause severe harm. The concern is that there is some risk (far from a certainty, but some risk) that A.I. becomes a much more powerful version of
such a person, due to getting something wrong about its very complex training process. Second, some may object that we can simply keep AIs in check with a balance of
power between many A.I. systems, as we do with humans. The problem is that while humans vary enormously, A.I. systems broadly share training and alignment techniques across the industry, and
those techniques may fail in a correlated way. Furthermore, given the cost of training such systems, it may even be the case that all systems are essentially derived from a
very small number of base models. Additionally, even if a small fraction of A.I. instances are misaligned, they may be able to take advantage of offense-dominant technologies, such that having
“good” AIs to defend against the bad AIs is not necessarily always effective. Of course, the balance of power between humans does not always work either, some historical figures have
come close to taking over the world.
A third objection is that all of the A.I. companies do pre-release testing of their models, and should be able to detect misalignment at that point. But this is not
firm ground to stand on: we found that Claude Sonnet four. was able to recognize that it was in a test during some of our pre-release alignment evaluations. It’s possible
that a misaligned model (and remember, all frontier models will very likely be far more intelligent soon) might intentionally “game” such questions to mask its intentions. In fact, last year
our interpretability team found that when we directly altered a test model’s beliefs using a kind of “model neuroscience” technique to make it think it was not being evaluated, it
became more misaligned. If models know when they’re being evaluated and can be on their best behavior during the test, it renders any pre-release testing much more uncertain. Defenses What
should be done or is being done to address these autonomy risks? I think there are four basic categories of intervention, some of which can be done by individual A.I.
companies (and which Anthropic is trying to do), and some of which require action at the societal level. First, it is important to develop the science of reliably training and
steering A.I. models, of forming their personalities in a predictable, stable, and positive direction. Anthropic has been heavily focused on this problem since its creation, and over time has developed
a number of techniques to improve the steering and training of A.I. systems and to understand the logic of why unpredictable behavior sometimes occurs. One of our core innovations (aspects
of which have since been adopted by other A.I. companies) is Constitutional A.I., which is the idea that A.I. training (specifically the “post-training” stage, in which we steer how the
model behaves) can involve a central document of values and principles that the model reads and keeps in mind when completing every training task, and that the goal of training
(in addition to simply making the model capable and intelligent) is to produce a model that almost always follows this constitution. Anthropic has just published its most recent constitution, and
one of its notable features is that instead of giving Claude a long list of things to do and not do (e.g., “Don’t help the user hotwire a car”), the
constitution attempts to give Claude a set of high-level principles and values (explained in great detail, with rich reasoning and examples to help Claude understand what we have in mind),
encourages Claude to think of itself as a particular type of person (an ethical but balanced and thoughtful person), and even encourages Claude to confront the existential questions associated with
its own existence in a curious but graceful manner (i.e., without it leading to extreme actions). It has the vibe of a letter from a deceased parent sealed until adulthood.
We’ve approached Claude’s constitution in this way because we believe that training Claude at the level of identity, character, values, and personality, rather than giving it specific instructions or priorities
without explaining the reasons behind them, is more likely to lead to a coherent, wholesome, and balanced psychology and less likely to fall prey to the kinds of “traps” I
discussed above. Millions of people talk to Claude about an astonishingly diverse range of topics, which makes it impossible to write out a completely comprehensive list of safeguards ahead of
time. Claude’s values help it generalize to new situations whenever it is in doubt. Above, I discussed the idea that models draw upon data from their training process to adopt
a persona. Whereas flaws in that process could cause models to adopt a bad or evil personality (perhaps drawing on archetypes of bad or evil people), the goal of our
constitution is to do the opposite: to teach Claude a concrete archetype of what it means to be a good A.I.. Claude’s constitution presents a vision for what a robustly
good Claude is like; the rest of our training process aims to reinforce the message that Claude lives up to this vision. This is like a child forming their identity
by imitating the virtues of fictional role models they read about in books. We believe that a feasible goal for 2026 is to train Claude in such a way that
it almost never goes against the spirit of its constitution. Getting this right will require an incredible mix of training and steering methods, large and small, some of which Anthropic
has been using for years and some of which are currently under development. But, difficult as it sounds, I believe this is a realistic goal, though it will require extraordinary
and rapid efforts.
The second thing we can do is develop the science of looking inside A.I. models to diagnose their behavior so that we can identify problems and fix them. This is
the science of interpretability, and I’ve talked about its importance in previous essays. Even if we do a great job of developing Claude’s constitution and apparently training Claude to essentially
always adhere to it, legitimate concerns remain. As I’ve noted above, A.I. models can behave very differently under different circumstances, and as Claude gets more powerful and more capable of
acting in the world on a larger scale, it’s possible this could bring it into novel situations where previously unobserved problems with its constitutional training emerge. I am actually fairly
optimistic that Claude’s constitutional training will be more robust to novel situations than people might think, because we are increasingly finding that high-level training at the level of character and
identity is surprisingly powerful and generalizes well. But there’s no way to know that for sure, and when we’re talking about risks to humanity, it’s important to be paranoid and
to try to obtain safety and reliability in several different, independent ways. One of those ways is to look inside the model itself. By “looking inside,” I mean analyzing the
soup of numbers and operations that makes up Claude’s neural net and trying to understand, mechanistically, what they are computing and why. Recall that these A.I. models are grown rather
than built, so we don’t have a natural understanding of how they work, but we can try to develop an understanding by correlating the model’s “neurons” and “synapses” to stimuli
and behavior (or even altering the neurons and synapses and seeing how that changes behavior), similar to how neuroscientists study animal brains by correlating measurement and intervention to external stimuli
and behavior. We’ve made a great deal of progress in this direction, and can now identify tens of millions of “features” inside Claude’s neural net that correspond to human-understandable ideas
and concepts, and we can also selectively activate features in a way that alters behavior. More recently, we have gone beyond individual features to mapping “circuits” that orchestrate complex behavior
like rhyming, reasoning about theory of mind, or the step-by-step reasoning needed to answer questions such as, “What is the capital of the state containing Dallas?” Even more recently, we’ve
begun to use mechanistic interpretability techniques to improve our safeguards and to conduct “audits” of new models before we release them, looking for evidence of deception, scheming, power-seeking, or a
propensity to behave differently when being evaluated.
The unique value of interpretability is that by looking inside the model and seeing how it works, you in principle have the ability to deduce what a model might do
in a hypothetical situation you can’t directly test, which is the worry with relying solely on constitutional training and empirical testing of behavior. You also in principle have the ability
to answer questions about why the model is behaving the way it is, for example, whether it is saying something it believes is false or hiding its true capabilities, and
thus it is possible to catch worrying signs even when there is nothing visibly wrong with the model’s behavior. To make a simple analogy, a clockwork watch may be ticking
normally, such that it’s very hard to tell that it is likely to break down next month, but opening up the watch and looking inside can reveal mechanical weaknesses that
allow you to figure it out. Constitutional A.I. (along with similar alignment methods) and mechanistic interpretability are most powerful when used together, as a back-and-forth process of improving Claude’s training
and then testing for problems. The constitution reflects deeply on our intended personality for Claude; interpretability techniques can give us a window into whether that intended personality has taken hold.
The third thing we can do to help address autonomy risks is to build the infrastructure necessary to monitor our models in live internal and external use, and publicly share
any problems we find. The more that people are aware of a particular way today’s A.I. systems have been observed to behave badly, the more that users, analysts, and researchers
can watch for this behavior or similar ones in present or future systems. It also allows A.I. companies to learn from each other, when concerns are publicly disclosed by one
company, other companies can watch for them as well. And if everyone discloses problems, then the industry as a whole gets a much better picture of where things are going
well and where they are going poorly. Anthropic has tried to do this as much as possible. We are investing in a wide range of evaluations so that we can
understand the behaviors of our models in the lab, as well as monitoring tools to observe behaviors in the wild (when allowed by customers). This will be essential for giving
us and others the empirical information necessary to make better determinations about how these systems operate and how they break. We publicly disclose “system cards” with each model release that
aim for completeness and a thorough exploration of possible risks. Our system cards often run to hundreds of pages, and require substantial pre-release effort that we could have spent on
pursuing maximal commercial advantage. We’ve also broadcasted model behaviors more loudly when we see particularly concerning ones, as with the tendency to engage in blackmail.
The fourth thing we can do is encourage coordination to address autonomy risks at the level of industry and society. While it is incredibly valuable for individual A.I. companies to
engage in good practices or become good at steering A.I. models, and to share their findings publicly, the reality is that not all A.I. companies do this, and the worst
ones can still be a danger to everyone even if the best ones have excellent practices. For example, some A.I. companies have shown a disturbing negligence towards the sexualization of
children in today’s models, which makes me doubt that they’ll show either the inclination or the ability to address autonomy risks in future models. In addition, the commercial race between
A.I. companies will only continue to heat up, and while the science of steering models can have some commercial benefits, overall the intensity of the race will make it increasingly
hard to focus on addressing autonomy risks. I believe the only solution is legislation, laws that directly affect the behavior of A.I. companies, or otherwise incentivize R&D to solve these
issues. Here it is worth keeping in mind the warnings I gave at the beginning of this essay about uncertainty and surgical interventions. We do not know for sure whether
autonomy risks will be a serious problem, as I said, I reject claims that the danger is inevitable or even that something will go wrong by default. A credible risk
of danger is enough for me and for Anthropic to pay quite significant costs to address it, but once we get into regulation, we are forcing a wide range of
actors to bear economic costs, and many of these actors don’t believe that autonomy risk is real or that A.I. will become powerful enough for it to be a threat.
I believe these actors are mistaken, but we should be pragmatic about the amount of opposition we expect to see and the dangers of overreach. There is also a genuine
risk that overly prescriptive legislation ends up imposing tests or rules that don’t actually improve safety but that waste a lot of time (essentially amounting to “safety theater”), this too
would cause backlash and make safety legislation look silly. Anthropic’s view has been that the right place to start is with transparency legislation, which essentially tries to require that every
frontier A.I. company engage in the transparency practices I’ve described earlier in this section. California’s SB 53 and New York’s RAISE Act are examples of this kind of legislation, which
Anthropic supported and which have successfully passed. In supporting and helping to craft these laws, we’ve put a particular focus on trying to minimize collateral damage, for example by exempting
smaller companies unlikely to produce frontier models from the law.
Our hope is that transparency legislation will give a better sense over time of how likely or severe autonomy risks are shaping up to be, as well as the nature
of these risks and how best to prevent them. As more specific and actionable evidence of risks emerges (if it does), future legislation over the coming years can be surgically
focused on the precise and well-substantiated direction of risks, minimizing collateral damage. To be clear, if truly strong evidence of risks emerges, then rules should be proportionately strong. Overall, I
am optimistic that a mixture of alignment training, mechanistic interpretability, efforts to find and publicly disclose concerning behaviors, safeguards, and societal-level rules can address A.I. autonomy risks, although I am
most worried about societal-level rules and the behavior of the least responsible players (and it’s the least responsible players who advocate most strongly against regulation). I believe the remedy is
what it always is in a democracy: those of us who believe in this cause should make our case that these risks are real and that our fellow citizens need
to band together to protect themselves.
2. A surprising and terrible empowerment Misuse for destruction Let’s suppose that the problems of A.I. autonomy have been solved, we are no longer worried that the country of A.I.
geniuses will go rogue and overpower humanity. The A.I. geniuses do what humans want them to do, and because they have enormous commercial value, individuals and organizations throughout the world
can “rent” one or more A.I. geniuses to do various tasks for them. Everyone having a superintelligent genius in their pocket is an amazing advance and will lead to an
incredible creation of economic value and improvement in the quality of human life. I talk about these benefits in great detail in Machines of Loving Grace. But not every effect
of making everyone superhumanly capable will be positive. It can potentially amplify the ability of individuals or small groups to cause destruction on a much larger scale than was possible
before, by making use of sophisticated and dangerous tools (such as weapons of mass destruction) that were previously only available to a select few with a high level of skill,
specialized training, and focus. As Bill Joy wrote 25 years ago in Why the Future Doesn’t Need Us: Building nuclear weapons required, at least for a time, access to both
rare, indeed, effectively unavailable, raw materials and protected information; biological and chemical weapons programs also tended to require large-scale activities. The 21st century technologies, genetics, nanotechnology, and robotics , can
spawn whole new classes of accidents and abuses … widely within reach of individuals or small groups. They will not require large facilities or rare raw materials. … we are
on the cusp of the further perfection of extreme evil, an evil whose possibility spreads well beyond that which weapons of mass destruction bequeathed to the nation-states, to a surprising
and terrible empowerment of extreme individuals. What Joy is pointing to is the idea that causing large-scale destruction requires both motive and ability, and as long as ability is restricted
to a small set of highly trained people, there is relatively limited risk of single individuals (or small groups) causing such destruction. A disturbed loner can perpetrate a school shooting,
but probably can’t build a nuclear weapon or release a plague. In fact, ability and motive may even be negatively correlated. The kind of person who has the ability to
release a plague is probably highly educated: likely a PhD in molecular biology, and a particularly resourceful one, with a promising career, a stable and disciplined personality, and a lot
to lose. This kind of person is unlikely to be interested in killing a huge number of people for no benefit to themselves and at great risk to their own
future, they would need to be motivated by pure malice, intense grievance, or instability.
Such people do exist, but they are rare, and tend to become huge stories when they occur, precisely because they are so unusual. They also tend to be difficult to
catch because they are intelligent and capable, sometimes leaving mysteries that take years or decades to solve. The most famous example is probably mathematician Theodore Kaczynski (the Unabomber), who evaded
FBI capture for nearly 20 years, and was driven by an anti-technological ideology. Another example is biodefense researcher Bruce Ivins, who seems to have orchestrated a series of anthrax attacks
in 2001. It’s also happened with skilled non-state organizations: the cult Aum Shinrikyo managed to obtain sarin nerve gas and kill 14 people (as well as injuring hundreds more) by
releasing it in the Tokyo subway in 1995. Thankfully, none of these attacks used contagious biological agents, because the ability to construct or obtain these agents was beyond the capabilities
of even these people. Advances in molecular biology have now significantly lowered the barrier to creating biological weapons (especially in terms of availability of materials), but it still takes an
enormous amount of expertise in order to do so. I am concerned that a genius in everyone’s pocket could remove that barrier, essentially making everyone a PhD virologist who can
be walked through the process of designing, synthesizing, and releasing a biological weapon step-by-step. Preventing the elicitation of this kind of information in the face of serious adversarial pressure, so-called
“jailbreaks”, likely demands layers of defenses beyond those ordinarily baked into training. Crucially, this will break the correlation between ability and motive: the disturbed loner who wants to kill people
but lacks the discipline or skill to do so will now be elevated to the capability level of the PhD virologist, who is unlikely to have this motivation. This concern
generalizes beyond biology (although I think biology is the scariest area) to any area where great destruction is possible but currently requires a high level of skill and discipline. To
put it another way, renting a powerful A.I. gives intelligence to malicious (but otherwise average) people. I am worried there are potentially a large number of such people out there,
and that if they have access to an easy way to kill millions of people, sooner or later one of them will do it. Additionally, those who do have expertise
may be enabled to commit even larger-scale destruction than they could before. Biology is by far the area I’m most worried about, because of its very large potential for destruction
and the difficulty of defending against it, so I’ll focus on biology in particular. But much of what I say here applies to other risks, like cyberattacks, chemical weapons, or
nuclear technology.
I am not going to go into detail about how to make biological weapons, for reasons that should be obvious. But at a high level, I am concerned that L.L.M.s
are approaching (or may already have reached) the knowledge needed to create and release them end-to-end, and that their potential for destruction is very high. Some biological agents could cause
millions of deaths if a determined effort was made to release them for maximum spread. However, this would still take a very high level of skill, including a number of
very specific steps and procedures that are not widely known. My concern is not merely fixed or static knowledge. I am concerned that L.L.M.s will be able to take someone
of average knowledge and ability and walk them through a complex process that might otherwise go wrong or require debugging in an interactive way, similar to how tech support might
help a non-technical person debug and fix complicated computer-related problems (although this would be a more extended process, probably lasting over weeks or months). More capable L.L.M.s (substantially beyond the
power of today’s) might be capable of enabling even more frightening acts. In 2024, a group of prominent scientists wrote a letter warning about the risks of researching, and potentially
creating, a dangerous new type of organism: “mirror life.” The DNA, RNA, ribosomes, and proteins that make up biological organisms all have the same chirality (also called “handedness”) that causes
them to be not equivalent to a version of themselves reflected in the mirror (just as your right hand cannot be rotated in such a way as to be identical
to your left). But the whole system of proteins binding to each other, the machinery of DNA synthesis and RNA translation and the construction and breakdown of proteins, all depends
on this handedness. If scientists made versions of this biological material with the opposite handedness, and there are some potential advantages of these, such as medicines that last longer in
the body, it could be extremely dangerous. This is because left-handed life, if it were made in the form of complete organisms capable of reproduction (which would be very difficult),
would potentially be indigestible to any of the systems that break down biological material on earth, it would have a “key” that wouldn’t fit into the “lock” of any existing
enzyme. This would mean that it could proliferate in an uncontrollable way and crowd out all life on the planet, in the worst case even destroying all life on earth.
There is substantial scientific uncertainty about both the creation and potential effects of mirror life. The 2024 letter accompanied a report that concluded that “mirror bacteria could plausibly be created
in the next one to few decades,” which is a wide range. But a sufficiently powerful A.I. model (to be clear, far more capable than any we have today) might
be able to discover how to create it much more rapidly, and actually help someone do so.
My view is that even though these are obscure risks, and might seem unlikely, the magnitude of the consequences is so large that they should be taken seriously as a
first-class risk of A.I. systems. Skeptics have raised a number of objections to the seriousness of these biological risks from L.L.M.s, which I disagree with but which are worth addressing.
Most fall into the category of not appreciating the exponential trajectory that the technology is on. Back in 2023 when we first started talking about biological risks from L.L.M.s, skeptics
said that all the necessary information was available on Google and L.L.M.s didn’t add anything beyond this. It was never true that Google could give you all the necessary information:
genomes are freely available, but as I said above, certain key steps, as well as a huge amount of practical know-how cannot be gotten in that way. But also, by
the end of 2023 L.L.M.s were clearly providing information beyond what Google could give for some steps of the process. After this, skeptics retreated to the objection that L.L.M.s weren’t
end-to-end useful, and couldn’t help with bioweapons acquisition as opposed to just providing theoretical information. As of mid-2025, our measurements show that L.L.M.s may already be providing substantial uplift in
several relevant areas, perhaps doubling or tripling the likelihood of success. This led to us deciding that Claude Opus four (and the subsequent Sonnet four.5, Opus four.1, and Opus four.
models) needed to be released under our A.I. Safety Level three protections in our Responsible Scaling Policy framework, and to implementing safeguards against this risk (more on this later). We
believe that models are likely now approaching the point where, without safeguards, they could be useful in enabling someone with a STEM degree but not specifically a biology degree to
go through the whole process of producing a bioweapon. Another objection is that there are other actions unrelated to A.I. that society can take to block the production of bioweapons.
Most prominently, the gene synthesis industry makes biological specimens on demand, and there is no federal requirement that providers screen orders to make sure they do not contain pathogens. An
MIT study found that 36 out of 38 providers fulfilled an order containing the sequence of the 1918 flu. I am supportive of mandated gene synthesis screening that would make
it harder for individuals to weaponize pathogens, in order to reduce both A.I.-driven biological risks and also biological risks in general. But this is not something we have today. It
would also be only one tool in reducing risk; it is a complement to guardrails on A.I. systems, not a substitute.
The best objection is one that I’ve rarely seen raised: that there is a gap between the models being useful in principle and the actual propensity of bad actors to
use them. Most individual bad actors are disturbed individuals, so almost by definition their behavior is unpredictable and irrational, and it’s these bad actors, the unskilled ones, who might have
stood to benefit the most from A.I. making it much easier to kill many people. Just because a type of violent attack is possible, doesn’t mean someone will decide to
do it. Perhaps biological attacks will be unappealing because they are reasonably likely to infect the perpetrator, they don’t cater to the military-style fantasies that many violent individuals or groups
have, and it is hard to selectively target specific people. It could also be that going through a process that takes months, even if an A.I. walks you through it,
involves an amount of patience that most disturbed individuals simply don’t have. We may simply get lucky and motive and ability don’t combine, in practice, in quite the right way.
But this seems like very flimsy protection to rely on. The motives of disturbed loners can change for any reason or no reason, and in fact there are already instances
of L.L.M.s being used in attacks (just not with biology). The focus on disturbed loners also ignores ideologically motivated terrorists, who are often willing to expend large amounts of time
and effort (for example, the 9/11 hijackers). Wanting to kill as many people as possible is a motive that will probably arise sooner or later, and it unfortunately suggests bioweapons
as the method. Even if this motive is extremely rare, it only has to materialize once. And as biology advances (increasingly driven by A.I. itself), it may also become possible
to carry out more selective attacks (for example, targeted against people with specific ancestries), which adds yet another, very chilling, possible motive. I do not think biological attacks will necessarily
be carried out the instant it becomes widely possible to do so, in fact, I would bet against that. But added up across millions of people and a few years
of time, I think there is a serious risk of a major attack, and the consequences would be so severe (with casualties potentially in the millions or more) that I
believe we have no choice but to take serious measures to prevent it. Defenses
That brings us to how to defend against these risks. Here I see three things we can do. First, A.I. companies can put guardrails on their models to prevent them
from helping to produce bioweapons. Anthropic is very actively doing this. Claude’s Constitution, which mostly focuses on high-level principles and values, has a small number of specific hard-line prohibitions, and
one of them relates to helping with the production of biological (or chemical, or nuclear, or radiological) weapons. But all models can be jailbroken, and so as a second line
of defense, we’ve implemented (since mid-2025, when our tests showed our models were starting to get close to the threshold where they might begin to pose a risk) a classifier
that specifically detects and blocks bioweapon-related outputs. We regularly upgrade and improve these classifiers, and have generally found them highly robust even against sophisticated adversarial attacks. These classifiers increase the
costs to serve our models measurably (in some models, they are close to 5% of total inference costs) and thus cut into our margins, but we feel that using them
is the right thing to do. To their credit, some other A.I. companies have implemented classifiers as well. But not every company has, and there is also nothing requiring companies
to keep their classifiers. I am concerned that over time there may be a prisoner’s dilemma where companies can defect and lower their costs by removing classifiers. This is once
again a classic negative externalities problem that can’t be solved by the voluntary actions of Anthropic or any other single company alone. Voluntary industry standards may help, as may third-party
evaluations and verification of the type done by A.I. security institutes and third-party evaluators. But ultimately defense may require government action, which is the second thing we can do. My
views here are the same as they are for addressing autonomy risks: we should start with transparency requirements, which help society measure, monitor, and collectively defend against risks without disrupting
economic activity in a heavy-handed way. Then, if and when we reach clearer thresholds of risk, we can craft legislation that more precisely targets these risks and has a lower
chance of collateral damage. In the particular case of bioweapons, I actually think that the time for such targeted legislation may be approaching soon, Anthropic and other companies are learning
more and more about the nature of biological risks and what is reasonable to require of companies in defending against them. Fully defending against these risks may require working internationally,
even with geopolitical adversaries, but there is precedent in treaties prohibiting the development of biological weapons. I am generally a skeptic about most kinds of international cooperation on A.I., but
this may be one narrow area where there is some chance of achieving global restraint. Even dictatorships do not want massive bioterrorist attacks.
Finally, the third countermeasure we can take is to try to develop defenses against biological attacks themselves. This could include monitoring and tracking for early detection, investments in air purification
R&D (such as far-UVC disinfection), rapid vaccine development that can respond and adapt to an attack, better personal protective equipment (PPE), and treatments or vaccinations for some of the most
likely biological agents. mRNA vaccines, which can be designed to respond to a particular virus or variant, are an early example of what is possible here. Anthropic is excited to
work with biotech and pharmaceutical companies on this problem. But unfortunately I think our expectations on the defensive side should be limited. There is an asymmetry between attack and defense
in biology, because agents spread rapidly on their own, while defenses require detection, vaccination, and treatment to be organized across large numbers of people very quickly in response. Unless the
response is lightning quick (which it rarely is), much of the damage will be done before a response is possible. It is conceivable that future technological improvements could shift this
balance in favor of defense (and we should certainly use A.I. to help develop such technological advances), but until then, preventative safeguards will be our main line of defense. It’s
worth a brief mention of cyberattacks here, since unlike biological attacks, A.I.-led cyberattacks have actually happened in the wild, including at a large scale and for state-sponsored espionage. We expect
these attacks to become more capable as models advance rapidly, until they are the main way in which cyberattacks are conducted. I expect A.I.-led cyberattacks to become a serious and
unprecedented threat to the integrity of computer systems around the world, and Anthropic is working very hard to shut down these attacks and eventually reliably prevent them from happening. The
reason I haven’t focused on cyber as much as biology is that (1) cyberattacks are much less likely to kill people, certainly not at the scale of biological attacks, and
(2) the offense-defense balance may be more tractable in cyber, where there is at least some hope that defense could keep up with (and even ideally outpace) A.I. attack if
we invest in it properly. Although biology is currently the most serious vector of attack, there are many other vectors and it is possible that a more dangerous one may
emerge. The general principle is that without countermeasures, A.I. is likely to continuously lower the barrier to destructive activity on a larger and larger scale, and humanity needs a serious
response to this threat.
3. The odious apparatus Misuse for seizing power The previous section discussed the risk of individuals and small organizations co-opting a small subset of the “country of geniuses in a
datacenter” to cause large-scale destruction. But we should also worry, likely substantially more so, about misuse of A.I. for the purpose of wielding or seizing power, likely by larger and
more established actors. In Machines of Loving Grace, I discussed the possibility that authoritarian governments might use powerful A.I. to surveil or repress their citizens in ways that would be
extremely difficult to reform or overthrow. Current autocracies are limited in how repressive they can be by the need to have humans carry out their orders, and humans often have
limits in how inhumane they are willing to be. But A.I.-enabled autocracies would not have such limits. Worse yet, countries could also use their advantage in A.I. to gain power
over other countries. If the “country of geniuses” as a whole was simply owned and controlled by a single (human) country’s military apparatus, and other countries did not have equivalent
capabilities, it is hard to see how they could defend themselves: they would be outsmarted at every turn, similar to a war between humans and mice. Putting these two concerns
together leads to the alarming possibility of a global totalitarian dictatorship. Obviously, it should be one of our highest priorities to prevent this outcome. There are many ways in which
A.I. could enable, entrench, or expand autocracy, but I’ll list a few that I’m most worried about. Note that some of these applications have legitimate defensive uses, and I am
not necessarily arguing against them in absolute terms; I am nevertheless worried that they structurally tend to favor autocracies:
Fully autonomous weapons. A swarm of millions or billions of fully automated armed drones, locally controlled by powerful A.I. and strategically coordinated across the world by an even more powerful
A.I., could be an unbeatable army, capable of both defeating any military in the world and suppressing dissent within a country by following around every citizen. Developments in the Russia-Ukraine
War should alert us to the fact that drone warfare is already with us (though not fully autonomous yet, and a tiny fraction of what might be possible with powerful
A.I.). R&D from powerful A.I. could make the drones of one country far superior to those of others, speed up their manufacture, make them more resistant to electronic attacks, improve
their maneuvering, and so on. Of course, these weapons also have legitimate uses in the defense of democracy: they have been key to defending Ukraine and would likely be key
to defending Taiwan. But they are a dangerous weapon to wield: we should worry about them in the hands of autocracies, but also worry that because they are so powerful,
with so little accountability, there is a greatly increased risk of democratic governments turning them against their own people to seize power. A.I. surveillance. Sufficiently powerful A.I. could likely be
used to compromise any computer system in the world, and could also use the access obtained in this way to read and make sense of all the world’s electronic communications
(or even all the world’s in-person communications, if recording devices can be built or commandeered). It might be frighteningly plausible to simply generate a complete list of anyone who disagrees
with the government on any number of issues, even if such disagreement isn’t explicit in anything they say or do. A powerful A.I. looking across billions of conversations from millions
of people could gauge public sentiment, detect pockets of disloyalty forming, and stamp them out before they grow. This could lead to the imposition of a true panopticon on a
scale that we don’t see today, even with the CCP. A.I. propaganda. Today’s phenomena of “A.I. psychosis” and “A.I. girlfriends” suggest that even at their current level of intelligence, A.I.
models can have a powerful psychological influence on people. Much more powerful versions of these models, that were much more embedded in and aware of people’s daily lives and could
model and influence them over months or years, would likely be capable of essentially brainwashing many (most?) people into any desired ideology or attitude, and could be employed by an
unscrupulous leader to ensure loyalty and suppress dissent, even in the face of a level of repression that most populations would rebel against. Today people worry a lot about, for
example, the potential influence of TikTok as CCP propaganda directed at children. I worry about that too, but a personalized A.I.
agent that gets to know you over years and uses its knowledge of you to shape all of your opinions would be dramatically more powerful than this. Strategic decision-making. A
country of geniuses in a datacenter could be used to advise a country, group, or individual on geopolitical strategy, what we might call a “virtual Bismarck.” It could optimize the
three strategies above for seizing power, plus probably develop many others that I haven’t thought of (but that a country of geniuses could). Diplomacy, military strategy, R&D, economic strategy, and
many other areas are all likely to be substantially increased in effectiveness by powerful A.I.. Many of these skills would be legitimately helpful for democracies, we want democracies to have
access to the best strategies for defending themselves against autocracies, but the potential for misuse in anyone’s hands still remains. Having described what I am worried about, let’s move on
to who. I am worried about entities who have the most access to A.I., who are starting from a position of the most political power, or who have an existing
history of repression. In order of severity, I am worried about:
The CCP. China is second only to the United States in A.I. capabilities, and is the country with the greatest likelihood of surpassing the United States in those capabilities. Their
government is currently autocratic and operates a high-tech surveillance state. It has deployed A.I.-based surveillance already (including in the repression of Uyghurs), and is believed to employ algorithmic propaganda via
TikTok (in addition to its many other international propaganda efforts). They have hands down the clearest path to the A.I.-enabled totalitarian nightmare I laid out above. It may even be
the default outcome within China, as well as within other autocratic states to whom the CCP exports surveillance technology. I have written often about the threat of the CCP taking
the lead in A.I. and the existential imperative to prevent them from doing so. This is why. To be clear, I am not singling out China out of animus to
them in particular, they are simply the country that most combines A.I. prowess, an autocratic government, and a high-tech surveillance state. If anything, it is the Chinese people themselves who
are most likely to suffer from the CCP’s A.I.-enabled repression, and they have no voice in the actions of their government. I greatly admire and respect the Chinese people and
support the many brave dissidents within China and their struggle for freedom. Democracies competitive in A.I.. As I wrote above, democracies have a legitimate interest in some A.I.-powered military and
geopolitical tools, because democratic governments offer the best chance to counter the use of these tools by autocracies. Broadly, I am supportive of arming democracies with the tools needed to
defeat autocracies in the age of A.I., I simply don’t think there is any other way. But we cannot ignore the potential for abuse of these technologies by democratic governments
themselves. Democracies normally have safeguards that prevent their military and intelligence apparatus from being turned inwards against their own population, but because A.I. tools require so few people to operate,
there is potential for them to circumvent these safeguards and the norms that support them. It is also worth noting that some of these safeguards are already gradually eroding in
some democracies. Thus, we should arm democracies with A.I., but we should do so carefully and within limits: they are the immune system we need to fight autocracies, but like
the immune system, there is some risk of them turning on us and becoming a threat themselves. Non-democratic countries with large datacenters. Beyond China, most countries with less democratic governance
are not leading A.I. players in the sense that they don’t have companies which produce frontier A.I. models. Thus they pose a fundamentally different and lesser risk than the CCP,
which remains the primary concern (most are also less repressive, and the ones that are more repressive, like North Korea, have no significant A.I. industry at all).
But some of these countries do have large datacenters (often as part of buildouts by companies operating in democracies), which can be used to run frontier A.I. at large scale
(though this does not confer the ability to push the frontier). There is some amount of danger associated with this, these governments could in principle expropriate the datacenters and use
the country of AIs within it for their own ends. I am less worried about this compared to countries like China that directly develop A.I., but it’s a risk to
keep in mind. A.I. companies. It is somewhat awkward to say this as the CEO of an A.I. company, but I think the next tier of risk is actually A.I.
companies themselves. A.I. companies control large datacenters, train frontier models, have the greatest expertise on how to use those models, and in some cases have daily contact with and the
possibility of influence over tens or hundreds of millions of users. The main thing they lack is the legitimacy and infrastructure of a state, so much of what would be
needed to build the tools of an A.I. autocracy would be illegal for an A.I. company to do, or at least exceedingly suspicious. But some of it is not impossible:
they could, for example, use their A.I. products to brainwash their massive consumer user base, and the public should be alert to the risk this represents. I think the governance
of A.I. companies deserves a lot of scrutiny. There are a number of possible arguments against the severity of these threats, and I wish I believed them, because A.I.-enabled authoritarianism
terrifies me. It’s worth going through some of these arguments and responding to them. First, some people might put their faith in the nuclear deterrent, particularly to counter the use
of A.I. autonomous weapons for military conquest. If someone threatens to use these weapons against you, you can always threaten a nuclear response back. My worry is that I’m not
totally sure we can be confident in the nuclear deterrent against a country of geniuses in a datacenter: it is possible that powerful A.I. could devise ways to detect and
strike nuclear submarines, conduct influence operations against the operators of nuclear weapons infrastructure, or use A.I.’s cyber capabilities to launch a cyberattack against satellites used to detect nuclear launches. Alternatively,
it’s possible that taking over countries is feasible with only A.I. surveillance and A.I. propaganda, and never actually presents a clear moment where it’s obvious what is going on and
where a nuclear response would be appropriate. Maybe these things aren’t feasible and the nuclear deterrent will still be effective, but it seems too high stakes to take a risk.
A second possible objection is that there might be countermeasures we can take against these tools of autocracy. We can counter drones with our own drones, cyberdefense will improve along
with cyberattack, there may be ways to immunize people against propaganda, etc. My response is that these defenses will only be possible with comparably powerful A.I.. If there isn’t some
counterforce with a comparably smart and numerous country of geniuses in a datacenter, it won’t be possible to match the quality or quantity of drones, for cyberdefense to outsmart cyberoffense,
etc. So the question of countermeasures reduces to the question of a balance of power in powerful A.I.. Here, I am concerned about the recursive or self-reinforcing property of powerful
A.I. (which I discussed at the beginning of this essay): that each generation of A.I. can be used to design and train the next generation of A.I.. This leads to
a risk of a runaway advantage, where the current leader in powerful A.I. may be able to increase their lead and may be difficult to catch up with. We need
to make sure it is not an authoritarian country that gets to this loop first. Furthermore, even if a balance of power can be achieved, there is still risk that
the world could be split up into autocratic spheres, as in Nineteen Eighty-Four. Even if several competing powers each have their powerful A.I. models, and none can overpower the others,
each power could still internally repress their own population, and would be very difficult to overthrow (since the populations don’t have powerful A.I. to defend themselves). It is thus important
to prevent A.I.-enabled autocracy even if it doesn’t lead to a single country taking over the world. Defenses
How do we defend against this wide range of autocratic tools and potential threat actors? As in the previous sections, there are several things I think we can do. First,
we should absolutely not be selling chips, chip-making tools, or datacenters to the CCP. Chips and chip-making tools are the single greatest bottleneck to powerful A.I., and blocking them is
a simple but extremely effective measure, perhaps the most important single action we can take. It makes no sense to sell the CCP the tools with which to build an
A.I. totalitarian state and possibly conquer us militarily. A number of complicated arguments are made to justify such sales, such as the idea that “spreading our tech stack around the
world” allows “America to win” in some general, unspecified economic battle. In my view, this is like selling nuclear weapons to North Korea and then bragging that the missile casings
are made by Boeing and so the US is “winning.” China is several years behind the US in their ability to produce frontier chips in quantity, and the critical period
for building the country of geniuses in a datacenter is very likely to be within those next several years. There is no reason to give a giant boost to their
A.I. industry during this critical period. Second, it makes sense to use A.I. to empower democracies to resist autocracies. This is the reason Anthropic considers it important to provide A.I.
to the intelligence and defense communities in the US and its democratic allies. Defending democracies that are under attack, such as Ukraine and (via cyber attacks) Taiwan, seems especially high
priority, as does empowering democracies to use their intelligence services to disrupt and degrade autocracies from the inside. At some level the only way to respond to autocratic threats is
to match and outclass them militarily. A coalition of the US and its democratic allies, if it achieved predominance in powerful A.I., would be in a position to not only
defend itself against autocracies, but contain them and limit their A.I. totalitarian abuses. Third, we need to draw a hard line against A.I. abuses within democracies. There need to be
limits to what we allow our governments to do with A.I., so that they don’t seize power or repress their own people. The formulation I have come up with is
that we should use A.I. for national defense in all ways except those which would make us more like our autocratic adversaries.
Where should the line be drawn? In the list at the beginning of this section, two items, using A.I. for domestic mass surveillance and mass propaganda, seem to me like
bright red lines and entirely illegitimate. Some might argue that there’s no need to do anything (at least in the US), since domestic mass surveillance is already illegal under the
Fourth Amendment. But the rapid progress of A.I. may create situations that our existing legal frameworks are not well designed to deal with. For example, it would likely not be
unconstitutional for the US government to conduct massively scaled recordings of all public conversations (e.g., things people say to each other on a street corner), and previously it would have
been difficult to sort through this volume of information, but with A.I. it could all be transcribed, interpreted, and triangulated to create a picture of the attitude and loyalties of
many or most citizens. I would support civil liberties-focused legislation (or maybe even a constitutional amendment) that imposes stronger guardrails against A.I.-powered abuses. The other two items, fully autonomous weapons
and A.I. for strategic decision-making, are harder lines to draw since they have legitimate uses in defending democracy, while also being prone to abuse. Here I think what is warranted
is extreme care and scrutiny combined with guardrails to prevent abuses. My main fear is having too small a number of “fingers on the button,” such that one or a
handful of people could essentially operate a drone army without needing any other humans to cooperate to carry out their orders. As A.I. systems get more powerful, we may need
to have more direct and immediate oversight mechanisms to ensure they are not misused, perhaps involving branches of government other than the executive. I think we should approach fully autonomous
weapons in particular with great caution, and not rush into their use without proper safeguards. Fourth, after drawing a hard line against A.I. abuses in democracies, we should use that
precedent to create an international taboo against the worst abuses of powerful A.I.. I recognize that the current political winds have turned against international cooperation and international norms, but this
is a case where we sorely need them. The world needs to understand the dark potential of powerful A.I. in the hands of autocrats, and to recognize that certain uses
of A.I. amount to an attempt to permanently steal their freedom and impose a totalitarian state from which they can’t escape. I would even argue that in some cases, large-scale
surveillance with powerful A.I., mass propaganda with powerful A.I., and certain types of offensive uses of fully autonomous weapons should be considered crimes against humanity. More generally, a robust norm
against A.I.-enabled totalitarianism and all its tools and instruments is sorely needed.
It is possible to have an even stronger version of this position, which is that because the possibilities of A.I.-enabled totalitarianism are so dark, autocracy is simply not a form
of government that people can accept in the post-powerful A.I. age. Just as feudalism became unworkable with the industrial revolution, the A.I. age could lead inevitably and logically to the
conclusion that democracy (and, hopefully, democracy improved and reinvigorated by A.I., as I discuss in Machines of Loving Grace) is the only viable form of government if humanity is to
have a good future. Fifth and finally, A.I. companies should be carefully watched, as should their connection to the government, which is necessary, but must have limits and boundaries. The
sheer amount of capability embodied in powerful A.I. is such that ordinary corporate governance, which is designed to protect shareholders and prevent ordinary abuses such as fraud, is unlikely to
be up to the task of governing A.I. companies. There may also be value in companies publicly committing to (perhaps even as part of corporate governance) not take certain actions,
such as privately building or stockpiling military hardware, using large amounts of computing resources by single individuals in unaccountable ways, or using their A.I. products as propaganda to manipulate public
opinion in their favor. The danger here comes from many directions, and some directions are in tension with others. The only constant is that we must seek accountability, norms, and
guardrails for everyone, even as we empower “good” actors to keep “bad” actors in check.
4. Player piano Economic disruption The previous three sections were essentially about security risks posed by powerful A.I.: risks from the A.I. itself, risks from misuse by individuals and small
organizations and risks of misuse by states and large organizations. If we put aside security risks or assume they have been solved, the next question is economic. What will be
the effect of this infusion of incredible “human” capital on the economy? Clearly, the most obvious effect will be to greatly increase economic growth. The pace of advances in scientific
research, biomedical innovation, manufacturing, supply chains, the efficiency of the financial system, and much more are almost guaranteed to lead to a much faster rate of economic growth. In Machines
of Loving Grace, I suggest that a 10–20% sustained annual GDP growth rate may be possible. But it should be clear that this is a double-edged sword: what are the
economic prospects for most existing humans in such a world? New technologies often bring labor market shocks, and in the past humans have always recovered from them, but I am
concerned that this is because these previous shocks affected only a small fraction of the full possible range of human abilities, leaving room for humans to expand to new tasks.
A.I. will have effects that are much broader and occur much faster, and therefore I worry it will be much more challenging to make things work out well. Labor market
disruption There are two specific problems I am worried about: labor market displacement, and concentration of economic power. Let’s start with the first one. This is a topic that I
warned about very publicly in 2025, where I predicted that A.I. could displace half of all entry-level white collar jobs in the next 1–5 years, even as it accelerates economic
growth and scientific progress. This warning started a public debate about the topic. Many CEOs, technologists, and economists agreed with me, but others assumed I was falling prey to a
“lump of labor” fallacy and didn’t know how labor markets worked, and some didn’t see the 1–5-year time range and thought I was claiming A.I. is displacing jobs right now
(which I agree it is likely not). So it is worth going through in detail why I am worried about labor displacement, to clear up these misunderstandings. As a baseline,
it’s useful to understand how labor markets normally respond to advances in technology. When a new technology comes along, it starts by making pieces of a given human job more
efficient. For example, early in the Industrial Revolution, machines, such as upgraded plows, enabled human farmers to be more efficient at some aspects of the job. This improved the productivity
of farmers, which increased their wages.
In the next step, some parts of the job of farming could be done entirely by machines, for example with the invention of the threshing machine or seed drill. In
this phase, humans did a lower and lower fraction of the job, but the work they did complete became more and more leveraged because it is complementary to the work
of machines, and their productivity continued to rise. As described by Jevons’ paradox, the wages of farmers and perhaps even the number of farmers continued to increase. Even when 90%
of the job is being done by machines, humans can simply do 10x more of the 10% they still do, producing 10x as much output for the same amount of
labor. Eventually, machines do everything or almost everything, as with modern combine harvesters, tractors, and other equipment. At this point farming as a form of human employment really does go
into steep decline, and this potentially causes serious disruption in the short term, but because farming is just one of many useful activities that humans are able to do, people
eventually switch to other jobs, such as operating factory machines. This is true even though farming accounted for a huge proportion of employment ex ante. 250 years ago, 90% of
Americans lived on farms; in Europe, 50–60% of employment was agricultural. Now those percentages are in the low single digits in those places, because workers switched to industrial jobs (and
later, knowledge work jobs). The economy can do what previously required most of the labor force with only 1–2% of it, freeing up the rest of the labor force to
build an ever more advanced industrial society. There’s no fixed “lump of labor,” just an ever-expanding ability to do more and more with less and less. People’s wages rise in
line with the GDP exponential and the economy maintains full employment once disruptions in the short term have passed. It’s possible things will go roughly the same way with A.I.,
but I would bet pretty strongly against it. Here are some reasons I think A.I. is likely to be different:
Speed. The pace of progress in A.I. is much faster than for previous technological revolutions. For example, in the last two years, A.I. models went from barely being able to
complete a single line of code, to writing all or almost all of the code for some people, including engineers at Anthropic. Soon, they may do the entire task of
a software engineer end to end. It is hard for people to adapt to this pace of change, both to the changes in how a given job works and in
the need to switch to new jobs. Even legendary programmers are increasingly describing themselves as “behind.” The pace may if anything continue to speed up, as A.I. coding models increasingly
accelerate the task of A.I. development. To be clear, speed in itself does not mean labor markets and employment won’t eventually recover, it just implies the short-term transition will be
unusually painful compared to past technologies, since humans and labor markets are slow to react and to equilibrate. Cognitive breadth. As suggested by the phrase “country of geniuses in a
datacenter,” A.I. will be capable of a very wide range of human cognitive abilities, perhaps all of them. This is very different from previous technologies like mechanized farming, transportation, or
even computers. This will make it harder for people to switch easily from jobs that are displaced to similar jobs that they would be a good fit for. For example,
the general intellectual abilities required for entry-level jobs in, say, finance, consulting, and law are fairly similar, even if the specific knowledge is quite different. A technology that disrupted only
one of these three would allow employees to switch to the two other close substitutes (or for undergraduates to switch majors). But disrupting all three at once (along with many
other similar jobs) may be harder for people to adapt to. Furthermore, it’s not just that most existing jobs will be disrupted. That part has happened before, recall that farming
was a huge percentage of employment. But farmers could switch to the relatively similar work of operating factory machines, even though that work hadn’t been common before. By contrast, A.I.
is increasingly matching the general cognitive profile of humans, which means it will also be good at the new jobs that would ordinarily be created in response to the old
ones being automated. Another way to say it is that A.I. isn’t a substitute for specific human jobs but rather a general labor substitute for humans. Slicing by cognitive ability.
Across a wide range of tasks, A.I. appears to be advancing from the bottom of the ability ladder to the top. For example, in coding our models have proceeded from
the level of “a mediocre coder” to “a strong coder” to “a very strong coder.” We are now starting to see the same progression in white-collar work in general.
We are thus at risk of a situation where, instead of affecting people with specific skills or in specific professions (who can adapt by retraining), A.I. is affecting people with
certain intrinsic cognitive properties, namely lower intellectual ability (which is harder to change). It is not clear where these people will go or what they will do, and I am
concerned that they could form an unemployed or very-low-wage “underclass.” To be clear, things somewhat like this have happened before, for example, computers and the internet are believed by some
economists to represent “skill-biased technological change.” But this skill biasing was both not as extreme as what I expect to see with A.I., and is believed to have contributed to
an increase in wage inequality, so it is not exactly a reassuring precedent. Ability to fill in the gaps. The way human jobs often adjust in the face of new
technology is that there are many aspects to the job, and the new technology, even if it appears to directly replace humans, often has gaps in it. If someone invents
a machine to make widgets, humans may still have to load raw material into the machine. Even if that takes only 1% as much effort as making the widgets manually,
human workers can simply make 100x more widgets. But A.I., in addition to being a rapidly advancing technology, is also a rapidly adapting technology. During every model release, A.I. companies
carefully measure what the model is good at and what it isn’t, and customers also provide such information after the launch. Weaknesses can be addressed by collecting tasks that embody
the current gap, and training on them for the next model. Early in generative A.I., users noticed that A.I. systems had certain weaknesses (such as A.I. image models generating hands
with the wrong number of fingers) and many assumed these weaknesses were inherent to the technology. If they were, it would limit job disruption. But pretty much every such weakness
gets addressed quickly, often, within just a few months.
It’s worth addressing common points of skepticism. First, there is the argument that economic diffusion will be slow, such that even if the underlying technology is capable of doing most
human labor, the actual application of it across the economy may be much slower (for example in industries that are far from the A.I. industry and slow to adopt). Slow
diffusion of technology is definitely real, I talk to people from a wide variety of enterprises, and there are places where the adoption of A.I. will take years. That’s why
my prediction for 50% of entry level white collar jobs being disrupted is 1–5 years, even though I suspect we’ll have powerful A.I. (which would be, technologically speaking, enough to
do most or all jobs, not just entry level) in much less than five years. But diffusion effects merely buy us time. And I am not confident they will be
as slow as people predict. Enterprise A.I. adoption is growing at rates much faster than any previous technology, largely on the pure strength of the technology itself. Also, even if
traditional enterprises are slow to adopt new technology, startups will spring up to serve as “glue” and make the adoption easier. If that doesn’t work, the startups may simply disrupt
the incumbents directly. That could lead to a world where it isn’t so much that specific jobs are disrupted as it is that large enterprises are disrupted in general and
replaced with much less labor-intensive startups. This could also lead to a world of “geographic inequality,” where an increasing fraction of the world’s wealth is concentrated in Silicon Valley, which
becomes its own economy running at a different speed than the rest of the world and leaving it behind. All of these outcomes would be great for economic growth, but
not so great for the labor market or those who are left behind. Second, some people say that human jobs will move to the physical world, which avoids the whole
category of “cognitive labor” where A.I. is progressing so rapidly. I am not sure how safe this is, either. A lot of physical labor is already being done by machines
(e.g., manufacturing) or will soon be done by machines (e.g., driving). Also, sufficiently powerful A.I. will be able to accelerate the development of robots, and then control those robots in
the physical world. It may buy some time (which is a good thing), but I’m worried it won’t buy much. And even if the disruption was limited only to cognitive
tasks, it would still be an unprecedentedly large and rapid disruption.
Third, perhaps some tasks inherently require or greatly benefit from a human touch. I’m a little more uncertain about this one, but I’m still skeptical that it will be enough
to offset the bulk of the impacts I described above. A.I. is already widely used for customer service. Many people report that it is easier to talk to A.I. about
their personal problems than to talk to a therapist, that the A.I. is more patient. When my sister was struggling with medical problems during a pregnancy, she felt she wasn’t
getting the answers or support she needed from her care providers, and she found Claude to have a better bedside manner (as well as succeeding better at diagnosing the problem).
I’m sure there are some tasks for which a human touch really is important, but I’m not sure how many, and here we’re talking about finding work for nearly everyone
in the labor market. Fourth, some may argue that comparative advantage will still protect humans. Under the law of comparative advantage, even if A.I. is better than humans at everything,
any relative differences between the human and A.I. profile of skills creates a basis of trade and specialization between humans and A.I.. The problem is that if AIs are literally
thousands of times more productive than humans, this logic starts to break down. Even tiny transaction costs could make it not worth it for A.I. to trade with humans. And
human wages may be very low, even if they technically have something to offer. It’s possible all of these factors can be addressed, that the labor market is resilient enough
to adapt to even such an enormous disruption. But even if it can eventually adapt, the factors above suggest that the short-term shock will be unprecedented in size. Defenses What
can we do about this problem? I have several suggestions, some of which Anthropic is already doing. The first thing is simply to get accurate data about what is happening
with job displacement in real time. When an economic change happens very quickly, it’s hard to get reliable data about what is happening, and without reliable data it is hard
to design effective policies. For example, government data is currently lacking granular, high-frequency data on A.I. adoption across firms and industries. For the last year Anthropic has been operating and
publicly releasing an Economic Index that shows use of our models almost in real time, broken down by industry, task, location, and even things like whether a task was being
automated or conducted collaboratively. We also have an Economic Advisory Council to help us interpret this data and see what is coming.
Second, A.I. companies have a choice in how they work with enterprises. The very inefficiency of traditional enterprises means that their rollout of A.I. can be very path dependent, and
there is some room to choose a better path. Enterprises often have a choice between “cost savings” (doing the same thing with fewer people) and “innovation” (doing more with the
same number of people). The market will inevitably produce both eventually, and any competitive A.I. company will have to serve some of both, but there may be some room to
steer companies towards innovation when possible, and it may buy us some time. Anthropic is actively thinking about this. Third, companies should think about how to take care of their
employees. In the short term, being creative about ways to reassign employees within companies may be a promising way to stave off the need for layoffs. In the long term,
in a world with enormous total wealth, in which many companies increase greatly in value due to increased productivity and capital concentration, it may be feasible to pay human employees
even long after they are no longer providing economic value in the traditional sense. Anthropic is currently considering a range of possible pathways for our own employees that we will
share in the near future. Fourth, wealthy individuals have an obligation to help solve this problem. It is sad to me that many wealthy individuals (especially in the tech industry)
have recently adopted a cynical and nihilistic attitude that philanthropy is inevitably fraudulent or useless. Both private philanthropy like the Gates Foundation and public programs like PEPFAR have saved tens
of millions of lives in the developing world, and helped to create economic opportunity in the developed world. All of Anthropic’s co-founders have pledged to donate 80% of our wealth,
and Anthropic’s staff have individually pledged to donate company shares worth billions at current prices, donations that the company has committed to matching. Fifth, while all the above private actions
can be helpful, ultimately a macroeconomic problem this large will require government intervention. The natural policy response to an enormous economic pie coupled with high inequality (due to a lack
of jobs, or poorly paid jobs, for many) is progressive taxation. The tax could be general or could be targeted against A.I. companies in particular. Obviously tax design is complicated,
and there are many ways for it to go wrong. I don’t support poorly designed tax policies. I think the extreme levels of inequality predicted in this essay justify a
more robust tax policy on basic moral grounds, but I can also make a pragmatic argument to the world’s billionaires that it’s in their interest to support a good version
of it: if they don’t support a good version, they’ll inevitably get a bad version designed by a mob.
Ultimately, I think of all of the above interventions as ways to buy time. In the end A.I. will be able to do everything, and we need to grapple with
that. It’s my hope that by that time, we can use A.I. itself to help us restructure markets in ways that work for everyone, and that the interventions above can
get us through the transitional period. Economic concentration of power Separate from the problem of job displacement or economic inequality per se is the problem of economic concentration of power.
Section 1 discussed the risk that humanity gets disempowered by A.I., and Section three discussed the risk that citizens get disempowered by their governments by force or coercion. But another
kind of disempowerment can occur if there is such a huge concentration of wealth that a small group of people effectively controls government policy with their influence, and ordinary citizens
have no influence because they lack economic leverage. Democracy is ultimately backstopped by the idea that the population as a whole is necessary for the operation of the economy. If
that economic leverage goes away, then the implicit social contract of democracy may stop working. Others have written about this, so I needn’t go into great detail about it here,
but I agree with the concern, and I worry it is already starting to happen. To be clear, I am not opposed to people making a lot of money. There’s
a strong argument that it incentivizes economic growth under normal conditions. I am sympathetic to concerns about impeding innovation by killing the golden goose that generates it. But in a
scenario where GDP growth is 10–20% a year and A.I. is rapidly taking over the economy, yet single individuals hold appreciable fractions of the GDP, innovation is not the thing
to worry about. The thing to worry about is a level of wealth concentration that will break society. The most famous example of extreme concentration of wealth in US history
is the Gilded Age, and the wealthiest industrialist of the Gilded Age was John D. Rockefeller. Rockefeller’s wealth amounted to ~2% of the US GDP at the time. A similar
fraction today would lead to a fortune of $600B, and the richest person in the world today (Elon Musk) already exceeds that, at roughly $700B. So we are already at
historically unprecedented levels of wealth concentration, even before most of the economic impact of A.I.. I don’t think it is too much of a stretch (if we get a “country
of geniuses”) to imagine A.I. companies, semiconductor companies, and perhaps downstream application companies generating ~$3T in revenue per year, being valued at ~$30T, and leading to personal fortunes well into
the trillions. In that world, the debates we have about tax policy today simply won’t apply as we will be in a fundamentally different situation.
Related to this, the coupling of this economic concentration of wealth with the political system already concerns me. A.I. datacenters already represent a substantial fraction of US economic growth, and
are thus strongly tying together the financial interests of large tech companies (which are increasingly focused on either A.I. or A.I. infrastructure) and the political interests of the government in
a way that can produce perverse incentives. We already see this through the reluctance of tech companies to criticize the US government, and the government’s support for extreme anti-regulatory policies
on A.I.. Defenses What can be done about this? First, and most obviously, companies should simply choose not to be part of it. Anthropic has always strived to be a
policy actor and not a political one, and to maintain our authentic views whatever the administration. We’ve spoken up in favor of sensible A.I. regulation and export controls that are
in the public interest, even when these are at odds with government policy. Many people have told me that we should stop doing this, that it could lead to unfavorable
treatment, but in the year we’ve been doing it, Anthropic’s valuation has increased by over 6x, an almost unprecedented jump at our commercial scale. Second, the A.I. industry needs a
healthier relationship with government, one based on substantive policy engagement rather than political alignment. Our choice to engage on policy substance rather than politics is sometimes read as a tactical
error or failure to “read the room” rather than a principled decision, and that framing concerns me. In a healthy democracy, companies should be able to advocate for good policy
for its own sake. Related to this, a public backlash against A.I. is brewing: this could be a corrective, but it’s currently unfocused. Much of it targets issues that aren’t
actually problems (like datacenter water usage) and proposes solutions (like datacenter bans or poorly designed wealth taxes) that wouldn’t address the real concerns. The underlying issue that deserves attention is
ensuring that A.I. development remains accountable to the public interest, not captured by any particular political or commercial alliance, and it seems important to focus the public discussion there. Third,
the macroeconomic interventions I described earlier in this section, as well as a resurgence of private philanthropy, can help to balance the economic scales, addressing both the job displacement and
concentration of economic power problems at once. We should look to the history of our country here: even in the Gilded Age, industrialists such as Rockefeller and Carnegie felt a
strong obligation to society at large, a feeling that society had contributed enormously to their success and they needed to give back. That spirit seems to be increasingly missing today,
and I think it is a large part of the way out of this economic dilemma. Those who are at the forefront of A.I.’s economic boom should be willing to
give away both their wealth and their power.
5. Black seas of infinity Indirect effects This last section is a catchall for unknown unknowns, particularly things that could go wrong as an indirect result of positive advances in
A.I. and the resulting acceleration of science and technology in general. Suppose we address all the risks described so far, and begin to reap the benefits of A.I.. We will
likely get a “century of scientific and economic progress compressed into a decade,” and this will be hugely positive for the world, but we will then have to contend with
the problems that arise from this rapid rate of progress, and those problems may come at us fast. We may also encounter other risks that occur indirectly as a consequence
of A.I. progress and are hard to anticipate in advance. By the nature of unknown unknowns it is impossible to make an exhaustive list, but I’ll list three possible concerns
as illustrative examples for what we should be watching for:
Rapid advances in biology. If we do get a century of medical progress in a few years, it is possible that we will greatly increase the human lifespan, and there
is a chance we also gain radical capabilities like the ability to increase human intelligence or radically modify human biology. Those would be big changes in what is possible, happening
very quickly. They could be positive if responsibly done (which is my hope, as described in Machines of Loving Grace), but there is always a risk they go very wrong,
for example, if efforts to make humans smarter also make them more unstable or power-seeking. There is also the issue of “uploads” or “whole brain emulation,” digital human minds instantiated
in software, which might someday help humanity transcend its physical limitations, but which also carry risks I find disquieting. A.I. changes human life in an unhealthy way. A world with
billions of intelligences that are much smarter than humans at everything is going to be a very weird world to live in. Even if A.I. doesn’t actively aim to attack
humans (Section 1), and isn’t explicitly used for oppression or control by states (Section three), there is a lot that could go wrong short of this, via normal business incentives
and nominally consensual transactions. We see early hints of this in the concerns about A.I. psychosis, A.I. driving people to suicide, and concerns about romantic relationships with AIs. As an
example, could powerful AIs invent some new religion and convert millions of people to it? Could most people end up “addicted” in some way to A.I. interactions? Could people end
up being “puppeted” by A.I. systems, where an A.I. essentially watches their every move and tells them exactly what to do and say at all times, leading to a “good”
life but one that lacks freedom or any pride of accomplishment? It would not be hard to generate dozens of these scenarios if I sat down with the creator of
Black Mirror and tried to brainstorm them. I think this points to the importance of things like improving Claude’s Constitution, over and above what is necessary for preventing the issues
in Section 1. Making sure that A.I. models really have their users’ long-term interests at heart, in a way thoughtful people would endorse rather than in some subtly distorted way,
seems critical. Human purpose. This is related to the previous point, but it’s not so much about specific human interactions with A.I. systems as it is about how human life
changes in general in a world with powerful A.I.. Will humans be able to find purpose and meaning in such a world?
I think this is a matter of attitude: as I said in Machines of Loving Grace, I think human purpose does not depend on being the best in the world
at something, and humans can find purpose even over very long periods of time through stories and projects that they love. We simply need to break the link between the
generation of economic value and self-worth and meaning. But that is a transition society has to make, and there is always the risk we don’t handle it well. My hope
with all of these potential problems is that in a world with powerful A.I. that we trust not to kill us, that is not the tool of an oppressive government,
and that is genuinely working on our behalf, we can use A.I. itself to anticipate and prevent these problems. But that is not guaranteed, like all of the other risks,
it is something we have to handle with care. Humanity’s test Reading this essay may give the impression that we are in a daunting situation. I certainly found it daunting
to write, in contrast with Machines of Loving Grace, which felt like giving form and structure to surpassingly beautiful music that had been echoing in my head for years. And
there is much about the situation that genuinely is hard. A.I. brings threats to humanity from multiple directions, and there is genuine tension between the different dangers, where mitigating some
of them risks making others worse if we do not thread the needle extremely carefully. Taking time to carefully build A.I. systems so they do not autonomously threaten humanity is
in genuine tension with the need for democratic nations to stay ahead of authoritarian nations and not be subjugated by them. But in turn, the same A.I.-enabled tools that are
necessary to fight autocracies can, if taken too far, be turned inward to create tyranny in our own countries. A.I.-driven terrorism could kill millions through the misuse of biology, but
an overreaction to this risk could lead us down the road to an autocratic surveillance state. The labor and economic concentration effects of A.I., in addition to being grave problems
in their own right, may force us to face the other problems in an environment of public anger and perhaps even civil unrest, rather than being able to call on
the better angels of our nature. Above all, the sheer number of risks, including unknown ones, and the need to deal with all of them at once, creates an intimidating
gauntlet that humanity must run.
Furthermore, the last few years should make clear that the idea of stopping or even substantially slowing the technology is fundamentally untenable. The formula for building powerful A.I. systems is
incredibly simple, so much so that it can almost be said to emerge spontaneously from the right combination of data and raw computation. Its creation was probably inevitable the instant
humanity invented the transistor, or arguably even earlier when we first learned to control fire. If one company does not build it, others will do so nearly as fast. If
all companies in democratic countries stopped or slowed development, by mutual agreement or regulatory decree, then authoritarian countries would simply keep going. Given the incredible economic and military value of
the technology, together with the lack of any meaningful enforcement mechanism, I don’t see how we could possibly convince them to stop. I do see a path to a slight
moderation in A.I. development that is compatible with a realist view of geopolitics. That path involves slowing down the march of autocracies towards powerful A.I. for a few years by
denying them the resources they need to build it, namely chips and semiconductor manufacturing equipment. This in turn gives democratic countries a buffer that they can “spend” on building powerful
A.I. more carefully, with more attention to its risks, while still proceeding fast enough to comfortably beat the autocracies. The race between A.I. companies within democracies can then be handled
under the umbrella of a common legal framework, via a mixture of industry standards and regulation. Anthropic has advocated very hard for this path, by pushing for chip export controls
and judicious regulation of A.I., but even these seemingly common-sense proposals have largely been rejected by policymakers in the United States (which is the country where it’s most important to
have them). There is so much money to be made with A.I., literally trillions of dollars per year, that even the simplest measures are finding it difficult to overcome the
political economy inherent in A.I.. This is the trap: A.I. is so powerful, such a glittering prize, that it is very difficult for human civilization to impose any restraints on
it at all. I can imagine, as Sagan did in Contact, that this same story plays out on thousands of worlds. A species gains sentience, learns to use tools, begins
the exponential ascent of technology, faces the crises of industrialization and nuclear weapons, and if it survives those, confronts the hardest and final challenge when it learns how to shape
sand into machines that think. Whether we survive that test and go on to build the beautiful society described in Machines of Loving Grace, or succumb to slavery and destruction,
will depend on our character and our determination as a species, our spirit and our soul.
Despite the many obstacles, I believe humanity has the strength inside itself to pass this test. I am encouraged and inspired by the thousands of researchers who have devoted their
careers to helping us understand and steer A.I. models, and to shaping the character and constitution of these models. I think there is now a good chance that those efforts
bear fruit in time to matter. I am encouraged that at least some companies have stated they’ll pay meaningful commercial costs to block their models from contributing to the threat
of bioterrorism. I am encouraged that a few brave people have resisted the prevailing political winds and passed legislation that puts the first early seeds of sensible guardrails on A.I.
systems. I am encouraged that the public understands that A.I. carries risks and wants those risks addressed. I am encouraged by the indomitable spirit of freedom around the world and
the determination to resist tyranny wherever it occurs. But we will need to step up our efforts if we want to succeed. The first step is for those closest to
the technology to simply tell the truth about the situation humanity is in, which I have always tried to do; I’m doing so more explicitly and with greater urgency with
this essay. The next step will be convincing the world’s thinkers, policymakers, companies, and citizens of the imminence and overriding importance of this issue, that it is worth expending thought
and political capital on this in comparison to the thousands of other issues that dominate the news every day. Then there will be a time for courage, for enough people
to buck the prevailing trends and stand on principle, even in the face of threats to their economic interests and personal safety. The years in front of us will be
impossibly hard, asking more of us than we think we can give. But in my time as a researcher, leader, and citizen, I have seen enough courage and nobility to
believe that we can win, that when put in the darkest circumstances, humanity has a way of gathering, seemingly at the last minute, the strength and wisdom needed to prevail.
We have no time to lose. I would like to thank Erik Brynjolfsson, Ben Buchanan, Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Allan Dafoe, Kevin Esvelt, Nick Beckstead, Richard Fontaine, Jim McClave, and very many
of the staff at Anthropic for their helpful comments on drafts of this essay.